---
layout: post
summary: When everything is awesome, nothing is.
featured: true
---

<blockquote>
Look, there goes Ms Celebrity! She's awesome, she's the best, she's incredible. Look, there's a statement by Mr
Douchebag. He's unbearable, he sucks, he's terrible, honestly.
</blockquote>

Online discourse loves hyperbole like that. Most people don't mean to say that Mrs Celebrity instills a sense of awe in
them, or that they had previously assumed her level of performance to be unattainable by humans.

Language is context dependent and weird, and as long as we can make ourselves understood, we're doing well. I know how
to read these statements, I know the intention, and yet – they weird me out. Part of that is **cultural**. I'm talking
about internet discourse in English, which gravitates towards American English.  Depending on your starting point,
either US culture tends to use over-the-top expressions, or European culture is painfully understated.¹ The joys of
intercultural communication.

But it's not only cultural, and my sense of unease has two or three valid origins.  First off, this kind of language
encourages you to form opinions of either ecstatic endorsement or utter disgust. But realistically, people don't have
opinions of this intensity on most topics. How exhausting that would be! Imagine getting up in the morning, using the
most awe inspiring toothbrush, and drinking the absolute best glass of water there has ever been!

But it's not always easy to get a more indifferent opinion across. When exuberance is understood to mean agreement,
agreement will sound like disapproval.  In this mode, it's also harder to express true delight. You'll have to go to
great lengths to say “This is awesome, no really, I mean it, I literally had tears in my eyes” etc. etc. Otherwise
you'll just sound like you had a vaguely good experience.

Similarly, it's also harder to distinguish between **shades of meh**. It's often important to say something like “A is
not good, but less bad than B”. But when the general discourse is understood to use hyperbolic language, a statement
like that will look like an endorsement of A. Because unless you describe something as horrible, vile, or abominable,
you're obviously not *properly* opposed to it.

Another reason for my unease is how **seductive** this kind of language is.² It's less work to declare something to be
awesome or terrible. Making a more measured judgement is not just a matter of choosing the right words, it also requires
having a more nuanced opinion first.  I often notice too late that I have declared that a book is “brilliant”, or that a
piece of information is “absolutely astonishing”. Then I try to take a deep breath and correct for more accurate
descriptions. It's not always obvious which word would be a better fit, which seems like something I should have known
*before* I made the first statement.

**Addendum:** I have no similar sense of unease about shitposting. Taking language to extremes intentionally is an art
form, and also requires that you have figured out a more nuanced opinion first.

----
¹ I'm only talking US culture vs European culture here because those are the ones I interact with most.

² This goes doubly for people who are not native speakers. You learn best by imitation, so you'll suddenly find yourself
imitate not only the phrases, but the attitudes encoded in them.
