---
date: '2020-06-10'
layout: post
summary: 'Learning texts by heart can be freeing.'
title: By Heart
---

I'm a hopeless romantic in many ways (that will probably crop up over time as I keep writing). One of them is that I
like poetry, and I like *knowing* poetry. Knowing a poem, or any text, by heart feels cool and empowering, and also like
something I should absolutely never tell people because I'm afraid that it would look like arrogance, like people being
douchebags about [knowing some
Latin](https://medium.com/@garius/the-problem-with-the-romans-is-they-always-try-to-walk-it-in-65a961e59648).  But this
is my ramble blog, so ramble I will. Why do I like learning texts?

First off, and I'm afraid this is and was really the first reason: It makes me part of an in-group. A good way to become
part of any social group is to put in some work upfront, which serves as a marker to show your dedication to your [group
bond]({% post_url 2020-03-04-bridging-and-bonding %}). It can be something like adopting a shared language, or
references to in-group knowledge, which show that you put in time and thought to learn how the group functions. It can
be organising events or participating visibly, going door-to-door, undergoing a ritual involving preparation, … anything
that comes with a *cost*. That's really sensible in a way, because it protects a group from bad actors undermining it
effortlessly.

Knowing even only a bit of literature intimately is an entrance fee for a huge international loose group, or rather, a
huge amount of loose groups. It will help you spot references others make (you don't have to become an obnoxious
reference-maker yourself!) and react appropriately. You can read Umberto Eco books and discover maybe 1% of the quotes
he hides throughout. One book I [love very much](https://books.rixx.de/reviews/2020/gaudy-night/) consists mostly of
more and less obscure quotes. And you'll have a good way to talk to people whose interests are at least somewhat
adjacent to the literature you invested time in – and since many areas of interest share a border with literature in
some way, that's a lot of people. For instance, my family likes to quote freely from a whole bunch of poems, so the
first poems I learnt were pure self-defence!

But also, and I should have put this first because it sounds less hacky and more lofty: Having passages trivially
available to you gives you a different, deeper connection with them. You'll discover that they apply to situations
throughout life in surprising ways that you hadn't considered before, so you basically carry your very own Tarot deck in
your head. They'll occur to you in weird situations, and grow older with you.

Plus, it is very reassuring to be able to recite a long poem in your head in some situations. Particularly if you're in
an uncomfortable spot, for example in a hospital, or spending a long uncomfortable waiting period somewhere, any
distraction is good. I had to undergo surgery a couple of times in the past, which placed me in situations where I could
either not have a book or phone with me (boo, contamination), or I was too addled with the *excellent* pain meds I was
given – falling back on long poems gave me something to do, and because I knew them so well, they also had a calming
familiar feeling to them.

So yeah, that's my case for learning poetry or other literature by heart.

------

*PS*: This is not an appeal to make kids do it. I know that out of our class of 24, at most three kids really enjoyed
it, probably less, and we were an extraordinarily nerdy group of people. Education is complex and I have no meaningful
opinion on the matter, especially since I started learning poetry before school required it and continued afterwards as
if school never happened.

*PPS*: This is actually one of the very late issues cropping up when learning a language. I'm somewhat fluent in
English, but there is literally no English poem (unless you count song lyrics) that I know completely. I can quote bits
and pieces of the terribly overused ones, like the triumvirat of YouTube poetry, *If*, *Invictus*, and *The Road Not
Taken*. Plus a bit of Shakespeare, but mostly couplets at a time at most, stuff like that. But sometimes a reference
crops up to some implicit canon that most school kids were put through and suddenly I find myself with new references to
find and learn and contextualise.
